1. Brian, Please check this readme file!
 
Blockchain industry is now at a major inflection point 
 
Rapid developments in the market didn’t just leave scars, it also brought much needed learning and wisdom. Blockchain industry as a whole is making remarkable progress: not only in advancing the underlying technologies, and also in how we evaluate those visions unlocked by them. We believe we now have a firm grasp on the blockchain dream; what’s important now is how we bring it about from the metaphysical realm into the physical world, how to give it life so it could live and breathe among the people, doing its job to change and innovate the world we live in. In that sense, we’ve come to value pragmatism in blockchain. Just as we value decentralization and transparency, we now also expect to learn from blockchain projects what the resulting products will look like, how they will go to market, how they plan to build a sustainable business, and how they will progress forward with mid- and long-term goals. Blockchain projects focusing on designing innovative futures are being challenged to validate their present business worth under a more rational lens, and will continue to face demands to prove their capability to deliver live products, their caliber to grow their business, and their integrity and their standard of business ethics. Only those projects who meet the raised bar will continue to trailblaze the next frontier of blockchain industry. 
 
In the market we continue to see decreasing presence of ‘opportunistic’ or ‘overly-optimistic’ projects that focused solely on the decentralization vision and lacked a product plan. The call for a disruptive innovation that asked participants to detach themselves from existing institutions to create a new world order by making the jump from ‘trustful’ to ‘trustless’ did not move the hearts of the majority. The surviving projects today have validated themselves against more strict standards with developed technologies and refined corporate structures, and are investing serious efforts to deliver working products that prove the benefits of blockchain technology for their audience. In overall, the blockchain industry is rapidly advancing forward, towards converging to a high professional standard. 
 Enterprises will lead the next stretch of blockchain market development 
 
The blockchain market so far has been mainly driven by remarkable individuals, small groups or communities, and numerous startups that led the advance by shaping the market and establishing the blueprints for future directions. However, starting this year, bigger players including enterprises and institutions are expected to bear the torch and join in the efforts to advance the market, introducing blockchain-enabled products with higher degrees of polish. This trend has been set in motion by tech giants with enterprise-facing cloud infrastructure offerings, such as Microsoft, Amazon, and Oracle. Newly joining the fray are those with massive customer-facing fronts, such as Kakao, LINE, and Facebook, with a huge user base matched with strong influence over the last mile of user experience. Enterprise entrants are expected to bring new products that will create new touchpoints for blockchain technologies at an unprecedented scale, stimulating market adoption, ushering in new strain of users fundamentally different in their behaviors and values from to existing crypto communities, and strongly influencing how societies perceive and embrace the values that blockchain promote. With well-placed nudges and user-friendly interfaces, the B2C enterprise entrants may leverage their disproportionally large number of non-crypto users to shift the industry’s current dominance of crypto exchanges to a rule by services providers. The new entrants can also bring in their expertise and aggregated experience in various industry sectors to identify value creation opportunities for blockchain in traditional industries. The products offered by enterprises may not prioritize decentralization as its 
1 
foremost value, and may not qualify as a fully decentralized applications (DApps); but those blockchain applications (BApps) will serve as positive market signals that showcase the qualities blockchain will unlock if invested with adequate resources and management determination. 
 Enterprise entrants does not guarantee blockchain mass adoption 
 
Enterprises with massive user base joining the mass adoption front is definitely a major milestone for the blockchain industry, but the event by itself does not guarantee blockchain businesses will find themselves visited more frequently by paying customers, or that they will start seeing improved bottom line. What we will see is growth in total addressable market - or users that can potentially be reached. Blockchain mass adoption still requires businesses to overcome the nontrivial challenges of user conversion and retention. The only way we can truly guarantee blockchain mass adoption with certainty is, of course, by building great blockchain products. Only when we deliver apps and services that embrace blockchain values at its core design but with such polish and usability that they are inseparable from user’s daily routines, only at that level of retention will we find user base build up in support for the product, that those groups grow to become user communities, generate interactive user behavior data in meaningful volume, ultimately leading up to user insights that start a virtuous cycle of product evolution. Klaytn believes that only when we deliver those products will we be able to establish a stable, healthy industry populated by a wide range of businesses, institutions, and governments. Only when we build that greater ecosystem will we see the benefits of technology reach the larger mass of our race. To that end, we continue our challenge to solve the technical hurdles that blockchain faces. 
 Klaytn exists to make blockchain easy to use for businesses and the end-users 
 
Blockchain is unmistakably a still nascent technology with only a few years of eventful history behind it. The ongoing debate comparing public and private chains (both with clear yet difficult quality trade-offs) exemplify that blockchain technologies clearly have much work ahead before it could satisfy business needs. Further, blockchain is still perceived as a hard-to-trust technology for users despite its selling point being a “technology of trust”; its performance limitations, in terms of responsiveness, scalability, and reliability, stood in the way of winning client’s hearts. The intrinsic high level of complexity from being a crossbreed of modern cryptography, peer-to-peer network, and database technologies doesn’t help customers understand blockchain’s potentials and relevance. The legacy systems of organizations may benefit from by replacing with blockchain technology are often deeply entrenched as integral part of the existing processes, and capable engineers and resources required to deliver blockchain solutions are often too expensive an investment to finance.  Klaytn understands the challenges, and will address them from three different perspectives: from enterprise experience (EX) perspective, developer experience (DX) perspective, and finally, user experience (UX) perspective. To solve EX issues, Klaytn aims to provide highly reliable, enterprise-grade performance infrastructure that satisfies modern user experience standards with highly-responsive latency, without sacrificing blockchain’s fundamental values of transparency, security, and decentralization. Further, to reduce the costs of new technology adoption and to secure sufficient freedom for designing new blockchain business models, Klaytn offers platform-level support for businesses to subsidize transaction fee for their users, along with freedom for businesses to configure their comfortable level of data privacy and scalability. Lastly, Klaytn supports businesses retain their legacy investments by providing hooking points to integrate existing assets such as BI or analytics tools to help them draw business insights more easily and proficiently. 
2 
To address DX issues, Klaytn offers API interoperability tools and IDEs customized to provide productivity and developer familiarity on par with tools offered by legacy technologies, bridging the gap in weaker developer support and resource provision.  Finally, to deliver better blockchain UX, Klaytn supports the technical means to help services avoid front-loading users with the unfamiliar and difficult responsibility of private key management, wallet setup, and account management. Klaytn’s mission is to become the first solution to bring mass adoption of blockchain technology to the world for the benefit of services and users. To that end, we are committed to making cutting edge technologies easy to reach and seamless to use, helping a wider audience perceive and value their potential. By building an engaged user base of significant size and of trustful relationship, and providing useful technology as an enabling infrastructure, we believe we can build a collaborative playground of new, adventurous businesses working hand in hand with users to discover new values, identify new product-market fits, and accelerate the speed of new innovations reaching mainstream. 
   
3 
2. Document History 
 
What is a Klaytn Position Paper? 
 
This document is an update to Klaytn’s first position paper published in September 2018. A position paper defines the problems Klaytn aims to address, explains their background, and describes the possible solution space that we may take to tackle those problems. A position paper takes a different perspective than a white paper, which defines a problem to solve and declaratively explains how a project will solve the problems. 
 What Problems Is Klaytn Trying To Solve? 
 
From its onset in 2018, Klaytn has identified mass adoption of blockchain technology as its primary challenge and has been building a blockchain platform that helps businesses develop blockchain services easy to use and valuable for end users. A platform for blockchain mass adoption must enable services with important blockchain qualities such as transparency, security, and decentralization, while preserving enterprise-level performance to support and facilitate sustainable business via reliability, scalability, and responsiveness. Further, blockchain platforms must support diverse collaboration across service partners who contributes to growing businesses together, developer communities working hand-in-hand, user groups, and technical or business partners cohabiting the ecosystem. 
 What Changed Since The Last Position Paper? 
 
The overall structure of the paper has been revised to better illustrate the Klaytn platform, its toolkits, and how the solution will shape an ecosystem towards a more stable world of blockchain. The inner workings of Klaytn, including platform architecture, has been added to facilitate a more comprehensive understanding. Detailed technical information has been added to a separate resource, Klaytn Docs, for in-depth exploration by tech-savvy audiences. 
 
Since we published the first position paper, blockchain industry underwent rapid developments, market complexities increased significantly, and user requirements became much more advanced. In particular, the need for higher security in blockchain network design grew stronger and more demanding, which led to our reinforcing Klaytn network’s long-term robustness by more thoroughly aligned incentive design. The Klaytn network & consensus design has moved away from the previous two-layer network architecture with clear, parallel distinction between participants’ roles, responsibilities, and source of funding. Where the previous position paper separated the role of block producing (by consensus nodes) and block auditing (by ranger nodes), in the new design the incentive systems are more intrinsically aligned so that, in the long term, Klaytn network could advance to a point where block auditors could also choose to participate in block producing, thereby expanding the pool of block producing participants and reinforcing network security, without degrading the platform's performance. In this sense, we have renamed the ranger nodes to ‘endpoint nodes’ as to emphasize the node’s functions rather than their predefined roles. 
 
Service Chain, the scalability solution in Klaytn, has also seen extension in its feature yet have been repackaged to make it easier to adopt by businesses. Where in the first position paper, Service Chain was a logical separation of a blockchain instance mainly aimed to solve resource limitation issues. In a similar way, the Region Chain solution in the first paper was also targeted to address hardware 
4 
resource limitations. In our updated position paper, we have repositioned Service Chain as a consolidated scalability solution that rolls up the features and benefits of both previous iterations of Service Chain and Region chain, and added flexible operation policies that businesses could leverage to tailor to their unique blockchain needs, from transaction fee pricing model, to the degree of data privacy in their chain, to the desired level of scalability and reliability under their own hardware configuration that meets their business needs. (Note that Service Chain is still an experimental solution that requires further testing and refinement to be used for stable performance, and its users should use their best judgment in evaluate risks involved. Klaytn is committed to further develop Service Chain to meet wider needs of our users, and we welcome contributions from our technical partners and users towards improving the solution.) 
 
  
5 
3. Klaytn Design 
 
Overview of Klaytn Blockchain Platform 
 
Klaytn aims to become the blockchain platform that empowers all businesses and end-users of the world to easily access and utilize blockchain technology, enabling massive-scale apps and services to benefit from a higher degree of transparency, security, and trust. To lower the technical hurdles of the nascent technology and to accelerate mass adoption in the global market, Klaytn focuses on three fronts: 1) to make the ?developer experience (DX)
? intuitive and productive for developer communities by providing useful features and well-polished tools, 2) to offer ?user experience (UX) indistinguishable from legacy apps or services by providing efficient means to remove friction and complexities from the customer journey, and most importantly, 3) to build a ?service-centric blockchain platform ?with ?enterprise-grade performance? without compromising ?high-degree of transparency and security?, as to overcome the chasm and bring authentic blockchain mass adoption to the world. To achieve these goals, Klaytn has built a platform design based on carefully researched product principles and experimental ideas. Figure 1 illustrates the overall architecture of Klaytn, highlighting the major components which will be described in detail in the following sections. With design goals clearly set on mass adoption, Klaytn’s platform architecture accommodates high level of flexibility, expandability, and modularity needed for horizontal growth across multiple markets, with built-in scalability solutions and modular toolkits easily adaptable for differentiated global business needs. 
 
 
Figure 1. Klaytn Blockchain Platform Architecture 
 
Note that Klaytn plans to iteratively evolve the platform design over time as it progresses towards its intended goal. We will release technical reports on performance achieved by our design choices and implementations, and in each report we will analyze the rationale behind our design decisions and production deliverables. 
 
The Trust Model in Klaytn Private blockchain can reach consensus more efficiently than public chains. BFT (Byzantine Fault Tolerant) based private blockchains, in particular, are capable of achieving high performance and efficiency by restricting the number of participant nodes. Such configuration, however, makes an expensive trade-off: they fail to make meaningful use of blockchain benefits because limiting the 
6 
number of nodes reduce data redundancy and weaken decentralization, and their permissive nature degrade transparency since consensus results are only open to a small group of participants. 
 
Klaytn, however, chooses Istanbul BFT as its consensus algorithm based on the belief that BFT’s performance benefits can be combined with the benefits of public blockchains through smart design choices. We believe that it is possible to build a public blockchain that retains its robust security and transparency while delivering enterprise-grade performance and reliability. Towards this goal, Klaytn adopts a trust model of “private consensus with public disclosure”, where a smaller group of consensus nodes (CNs) execute BFT consensus in a private network while surrounded by a larger public network of permissionless endpoint nodes (ENs) openly accessing (and where necessary, verifying) block generation results. Ultimately, Klaytn aims to perfect the combined balance of public security and transparency on a high-performance backend that empowers businesses and end-users with easy and reliable access to benefits offered by blockchain technology, and will continue to refine its network design to best support our objective.  
 
 
Klaytn Network 
 
Klaytn blockchain network is a combination of peer-to-peer subnetworks of nodes transmitting transactions and blocks to execute value transfers and run smart contracts. Klaytn network can be partitioned into three logical subnetworks based on their roles and purposes, as shown in Figure 2. 
 
 
Figure 2. Klaytn Network and its Logical Subnetworks (CCN, ENN, SCN) 
 
Core Cell Network (CCN) CCN consists of Core Cells (CCs) that verify and execute transactions submitted through Endpoint Nodes (ENs). CCN is also responsible for creating and propagating blocks throughout the network. 
 
Endpoint Node Network (ENN) ENN consists of Endpoint Nodes (ENs) that mainly create transactions, handle RPC API requests, and process data requests from service chains. 
 
7 
Service Chain Network (SCN) SCNs are Klaytn subnetworks composed of auxiliary blockchains independently operated by blockchain applications (BApps). Servicechains are connected via ENN to handle data requests together with Klaytn network. 
 
Figure 3 shows the overall topology of Klaytn network, where Core Cell Network (CCN) is further broken down in detail to show its two constituent subnetworks: Consensus Node Network (CNN) and Proxy Node Network (PNN). Endpoint Node Network (ENN) from Figure 2 is also shown as the surrounding network connected directly to PNN. 
 
 
Figure 3. Klaytn Network Physical Topology & Core Cell Network Breakdown (CNN and PNN) 
 
 
Core Cell (CC) CCN is composed of Core Cells (CCs), which is again composed of a single Consensus Node (CN) and two Proxy Nodes (PNs). 
 
Consensus Node Network (CNN) CNs form a full-mesh network among themselves called CNN. CNN applies BFT over a WAN (wide area network) and requires each CN to satisfy stringent hardware and network resource requirements to carry out BFT consensus at a sufficient performance level.  
 
Proxy Node Network (PNN) PNs are connected with each other and forms PNN. PNs explicitly do not connect with their peer within the same CC. Typically, PNs maintain just one connection with a peer PN, but this number is subject to change depending on the network configuration. 
8 

 Endpoint Node (EN) The outermost subnetwork in Figure 3, ENN, is solely composed of ENs connected to each other and also to a number of PNs. ENs serve as endpoints for Klaytn network handling RPC API requests and processing data sent to and from service chains. 
 
Bootnode Bootnodes are special type nodes operated by Klaytn to help newly joining nodes register to the network and to discover other nodes to connect with. CN bootnodes reside within the CNN and are not exposed to the public, while PN and EN bootnodes are publicly visible. PN bootnodes only allow permitted PNs to be registered, and lets eligible PNs connect with ENs. EN bootnodes provide ENs with information on which PNs to connect to.  
 
 
 
Service Chain Network Topology Servicechains in Klaytn network are auxiliary blockchains independent from the Klaytn mainchain, tailored for individual BApp requiring special node configurations, customized security levels, or exceptionally high throughput that makes deploying the BApp on the Klaytn mainchain inconvenient or economically infeasible. 
 
Klaytn servicechains may be used for various service-specific goals, and can connect to the mainchain for multiple reasons including data anchoring (periodic storing of block hashes from the service chain onto the mainchain to compensate for decreased security due to smaller number of nodes) or value transfer (interchain transfer of tokens including KLAY, Klaytn’s native unit of value, and KLAY-compatible tokens issued by BApps). 
 
Servicechains connected to Klaytn mainchain are collectively called SCN. Figure 4 shows the network topology of service chains being used to meet various business needs, connected with Klaytn mainchain to expand the Klaytn network. 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Klaytn Main Chain and Service Chains 
 
9 
Figure 5 shows an example of SCN connected directly with Klaytn mainchain’s CCN Bridge Node using a main/sub-bridge model to achieve low network latency in using the service chain’s features. Note that the method of connection between service chains and the mainchain may change in Klaytn’s future iterations.  
 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Main Chain and Service Chain Connection using Main/Sub-Bridge Model 
 
 
Block Generation and Propagation As a service-centric blockchain committed to removing usability hurdles, Klaytn is dedicated to minimizing network latency and providing satisfactory end-user experience. Block generation and propagation designs, along with the consensus algorithm used, play an important role in determining the expected latency of a blockchain platform. 
 
Block Generation Cycle A ‘round’ is a block generation cycle in Klaytn. Each round generates a new block, and is immediately followed by the start of a new round. Klaytn targets each round to last approximately ?one second?, although block generation interval may be influenced by network traffic and node operation conditions. 
 
Proposer and Committee Selection In each round, Klaytn randomly but deterministically selects a Consensus Node (CN) as the proposer for the block to be created, and then selects a group of CNs as the committee for the given round. Klaytn is not directly involved in the selection of either the proposer or committee; instead, each CN uses a random number derived from the most recent block header to run a cryptographic operation which yields proof that the CN has (or has not) been selected for this round. The committee size should be Byzantine resistant; if the size of the CNN is small, all CNs (except the proposer) are eligible to be selected as committee members. 
 
Block Proposal and Validation 
10 
Once selected, the proposer broadcasts its proof of selection for the round (i.e., a cryptographic proof verifiable by the public key of the proposer) to all CNs. Thereafter, the CNs selected as committee for the given round responds to the proposer with their own proofs of selection, notifying the proposer to whom to broadcast the new block to be proposed. The proposer then selects a set of transactions from its transaction pool and creates a block by ordering them. Lastly, the proposer executes consensus with the committee to agree upon and finalize the newly created block. Note that Klaytn plans to continuously improve its consensus algorithm to achieve higher security and efficiency. 
 
Block Propagation A proposed block must receive signatures from more than two-thirds of the committee members to be successfully finalized. When the committee reaches consensus, the new block is propagated to all CNs and the consensus round ends. Once the new block is propagated to all CNs, the information of the newly created block can be made available to all Klaytn network participants by delivering block header and body data to ENN through PNN.  
 
Public Disclosure and Open Validation Service providers and end-users on Klaytn network can freely validate block generation results and check if the CN committee have generated the block according to proper procedures. Such validation includes checking if the block header contains more than two-thirds of the committee signatures. All CNs must support open validation and are required to post their public keys (used to sign blocks) in a publicly accessible space (e.g., block headers). Open validation promotes transparency, deter censorship, and prevent malicious behaviors. 
 
Separated Propagation Channels for Blocks and Transactions (Multichannel Propagation) A network’s latency is heavily affected by its degree of congestion. Assuming the network’s throughput remains constant, increased number of transactions will cause the network’s latency to be proportionately delayed. Latency delay is a critical issue in ensuring satisfactory end-user experience using BApps; typical users of legacy mobile apps or web services will not tolerate response time that takes more than a few seconds, and blockchain services have no reason to assume a higher user tolerance. Klaytn adopts a multichannel approach in order to handle network congestion issues. By assigning separate propagation channels for transactions and blocks, Klaytn network is able to propagate newly created blocks in a timely manner even when the network faces heavy congestion with high number of transactions. In this way, Klaytn ensures that BApps on its network can stay responsive to end-user requests regardless of intermittent network traffic spikes. 
 
Block rewards For each round, block reward (which is the sum of 9.6 newly minted KLAY and transaction fees paid to process the block) will be distributed to Klaytn’s token economy structures according to preset distribution ratios. The proposer of the newly created block will receive 100% of the reward to be awarded to CNs, whereas the committee will receive none. Note that the probability of being selected as the proposer is influenced by the amount of KLAY staked by the CN, implying that a CN with more KLAY invested in the platform will probabilistically receive more rewards. Details of block reward distribution can be found in the Klaytn Token Economy section. 
 
 
Klaytn Accounts 
 
Overview of Account, State, and Address An ?account
? in Klaytn blockchain platform is a data structure containing information about a person, an organization, or a smart contract. Klaytn’s ?state
? is the collection of all its accounts’ states - that is, the 
11 
past and current state of all data stored across Klaytn’s accounts. When a transaction is executed on a Klaytn node, the state of Klaytn consequently changes across all its nodes. The state should be the same across all Klaytn nodes if they have processed the same blocks in the same order. State information of each account is associated with a 20-byte ?address
? , which is used to identify each account. 
 
Klaytn Account Types There are three types of accounts in Klaytn: ?legacy accounts, externally owned accounts (EOAs)?, and ?contract accounts?. ?Legacy accounts
? are identical to Ethereum accounts, supported by Klaytn to offer backward compatibility with Solidity contract codes built for running on EVMs. ?EOAs
? are controlled by private keys and do not have code associated with them. An EOA can be created using a private key and subsequently controlled by anyone with the key. In contrast, contract accounts have code associated with them and are controlled by their code. ?Contract accounts
? are created by contract deployment transactions; once deployed, a contract account cannot initiate new transactions by itself and  must be triggered by another account, either by an EOA or another contract account. 
 
Human-Readable Address An account in a typical blockchain platform is associated with a cryptographically processed address of certain length that usually looks like this: ?“0x0fe2e20716753082222b52e753854f40afddffd2”.
? Such address scheme has its own strengths in that it efficiently protects the privacy of account holders - however, it also proposes major problems in terms of end-user experience. First, it is very difficult for a human brain to memorize, or even recognize, such addresses, making them prone to input mistakes and various human errors that often lead to non-trivial financial damages. Second, such scheme takes away from end-users the power to choose one’s own preferred identity handle that’s easier to memorize or use. Combined, these problems are among the toughest usability hurdles that cause BApp user experience for typical end-users (who are more accustomed to the simpler, frictionless user experience offered by legacy mobile apps or services) to be perceived as alien, incomprehensible, and severely inconvenient. To overcome such challenges without undergoing large-scale, low-level architecture modifications, and to preserve backward compatibility with Ethereum, Klaytn opts to provide a mapping between Ethereum’s 20-byte address to a 20-byte length text string that end-users could assign their own preferred values to. This feature in Klaytn is called human-readable address. 
 
Role-Based Keys & Multi-Key Support Another major source of end-user inconvenience is the tight coupling between the account address and its key pair. When your private key is stolen, exposed, or somehow compromised, there is nothing you can do to restore your account’s security: your best option is to generate another key pair to create a new account, and migrate the balance from the old compromised account to the new one. Lack of support for advanced key schemes such as multi-sig or usage-specific key is yet another source of major inconvenience. Since Ethereum only has single data structure defined for accounts at the code level, modifying the Ethereum code is not a good option for extensibility and for performance optimization. To address those problems more efficiently, Klaytn accounts provide the following capabilities: ≤ Klaytn account allows the key pair associated with the account to be changed ≤ Klaytn account supports multiple key pairs, along with the ability to assign each key with different purposes ≤ Klaytn account maintains compatibility with legacy (Ethereum) accounts: legacy accounts retain full backward compatibility on Klaytn, but a new account is needed when using new account features  
 
12 
By utilizing Klaytn account’s usage-specific keys, end-users can better handle real-life security risk situations such as private key mismanagement. For example, when a user realizes that his or her private key has been exposed, the user can simply replace the compromised private key by removing the exposed key pair from his or her account and creating a new key pair to replace them. This could be achieved by using a dedicated key used for updating account information, created in advance and stored separately from the compromised private key. 
 
 
Klaytn Transactions 
 
Transactions Overview A transaction in a blockchain platform is a message sent between nodes that changes the state of the blockchain. For example, when a transaction that sends 10 KLAY from Alice’s account to Bob’s is executed, Alice's balance is decreased by 10 KLAY, and Bob's balance is increased by 10 KLAY. Note that a transaction cannot be interleaved with another transaction because a transaction is an atomic operation. A typical blockchain transaction has components as shown below: 
 
Components Description 
value The amount of value (in tokens) to be transferred 
to The account address that will receive the transferred value 
input Data attached to the transaction, used for transaction execution 
v, r, s The cryptographic signature generated by the sender to let the receiver obtain the sender's address 
nonce A value used to uniquely identify a sender’s transaction. If two transactions with the same nonce are generated by a sender, only one is executed. 
gas The maximum amount of transaction fee the transaction is allowed to use. 
 
Klaytn Transactions Klaytn improves Ethereum’s single transaction model by defining additional transaction types that empower transactions with new capabilities and optimizations for memory footprint and performance. Klaytn transactions can be grouped into three categories: ?value transfer
? , ?smart contract execution
? , and ?smart contract deploy
? transactions. 
Value Transfer Transaction Value transfer transactions simply send KLAY from the sender to the recipient. Note that the sender's address can be obtained from the signature v, r, s. Value transfer transactions are equivalent to traditional banking transactions: when a value transfer transaction executes, the specified value is transferred from the sender’s balance to the recipient’s. 
 
Smart Contract Execution Transaction Smart contract execution transactions trigger a specific function within a smart contract deployed on Klaytn network. The ‘to’ component contains the address of the  smart contract to execute, and which function to execute is determined by the value of ‘input’ component. This transaction can also transfer KLAY to the smart contract (this is only possible if the calling function is ?payable)
? . 
